
--- Page 1 ---
University of Wisconsin Milwaukee
UWM Digital Commons
Mobilizing the Past Art History
10-15-2016
3.2. Measure Twice, Cut Once: Cooperative
Deployment of a Generalized, Archaeology-
Specific Field Data Collection System
Adela Sobotkova
Macquarie University, adela@fedarch.org
Shawn A. Ross
Macquarie University, shawn@fedarch.org
Brian Ballsun-Stanton
Macquarie University, brian@fedarch.org
Andrew Fairbairn
University of Queensland, a.fairbairn@uq.edu.au
Jessica Thompson
Emory University, jessica.thompson@emory.edu
See next page for additional authors
Follow this and additional works at:https://dc.uwm.edu/arthist_mobilizingthepast
Part of theClassical Archaeology and Art History Commons
Recommended Citation
Sobotkova, Adela, Shawn A. Ross, Brian Ballsun-Stanton, Andrew Fairbairn, Jessica Thompson, Parker VanValkenburgh. “Measure
Twice, Cut Once: Cooperative Deployment of a Generalized, Archaeology-Specific Field Data Collection System.” InMobilizing the
Past for a Digital Future: The Potential of Digital Archaeology, edited by Erin Walcek Averett, Jody Michael Gordon, and Derek B.
Counts, 337-371. Grand Forks, ND: The Digital Press at the University of North Dakota, 2016.
This Book is brought to you for free and open access by UWM Digital Commons. It has been accepted for inclusion in Mobilizing the Past by an
authorized administrator of UWM Digital Commons. For more information, please contactopen-access@uwm.edu.

--- Page 2 ---
Authors
Adela Sobotkova, Shawn A. Ross, Brian Ballsun-Stanton, Andrew Fairbairn, Jessica Thompson, and Parker
VanValkenburgh
This book is available at UWM Digital Commons:https://dc.uwm.edu/arthist_mobilizingthepast/15

--- Page 3 ---


--- Page 4 ---
M P
obilizing the ast
for a
D f
igital uture

--- Page 5 ---


--- Page 6 ---
MOBILIZING
PAST
the
DIGITAL
for a
FUTURE
The Potential of
Digital Archaeology
Edited by
Erin Walcek Averett
Jody Michael Gordon
Derek B. Counts
The Digital Press @
The University of North Dakota
Grand Forks

--- Page 7 ---
Creative Commons License
This work is licensed under a
Creative Commons
By Attribution
4.0 International License.
2016 The Digital Press @ The University of North Dakota
This offprint is from:
Erin Walcek Averett, Jody Michael Gordon, and Derek B. Counts,
Mobilizing the Past for a Digital Future: The Potential of Digital
Archaeology. Grand Forks, ND: The Digital Press at the University of
North Dakota, 2016.
This is the information for the book:
Library of Congress Control Number: 2016917316
The Digital Press at the University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, North
Dakota
ISBN-13: 978-062790137
ISBN-10: 062790137

--- Page 8 ---
Table of Contents
Preface & Acknowledgments v
How to Use This Book xi
Abbreviations xiii
Introduction
Mobile Computing in Archaeology:
Exploring and Interpreting Current Practices 1
Jody Michael Gordon, Erin Walcek Averett, and Derek B. Counts
Part 1: From Trowel to Tablet
1.1. Why Paperless: Technology and Changes in Archaeological
Practice, 1996–2016 33
John Wallrodt
1.2. Are We Ready for New (Digital) Ways to Record
Archaeological Fieldwork? A Case Study from Pompeii 51
Steven J.R. Ellis
1.3. Sangro Valley and the Five (Paperless) Seasons:
Lessons on Building Effective Digital Recording Workflows for
Archaeological Fieldwork 77
Christopher F. Motz
1.4. DIY Digital Workflows on the Athienou
Archaeological Project, Cyprus 111
Jody Michael Gordon, Erin Walcek Averett,
Derek B. Counts, Kyosung Koo, and Michael K. Toumazou
1.5. Enhancing Archaeological Data Collection and
Student Learning with a Mobile Relational Database 143
Rebecca Bria and Kathryn E. DeTore

--- Page 9 ---
ii
1.6. Digital Archaeology in the Rural Andes:
Problems and Prospects 183
Matthew Sayre
1.7. Digital Pompeii: Dissolving the Fieldwork-Library
Research Divide 201
Eric E. Poehler
Part 2: From Dirt to Drones
2.1. Reflections on Custom Mobile App Development for
Archaeological Data Collection 221
Samuel B. Fee
2.2. The Things We Can Do With Pictures:
Image-Based Modeling and Archaeology 237
Brandon R. Olson
2.3. Beyond the Basemap: Multiscalar Survey through
Aerial Photogrammetry in the Andes 251
Steven A. Wernke, Carla Hernández, Giancarlo Marcone,
Gabriela Oré, Aurelio Rodriguez, and Abel Traslaviña
2.4. An ASV (Autonomous Surface Vehicle) for Archaeology:
The Pladypos at Caesarea Maritima, Israel 279
Bridget Buxton, Jacob Sharvit, Dror Planer,
Nikola Miškovic´, and John Hale
Part 3: From Stratigraphy to Systems
3.1. Cástulo in the 21st Century: A Test Site for a
New Digital Information System 319
Marcelo Castro López, Francisco Arias de Haro,
Libertad Serrano Lara, Ana L. Martínez Carrillo,
Manuel Serrano Araque, and Justin St. P. Walsh

--- Page 10 ---
iii
3.2. Measure Twice, Cut Once:
Cooperative Deployment of a Generalized,
Archaeology-Specific Field Data Collection System 337
Adela Sobotkova, Shawn A. Ross, Brian Ballsun-Stanton,
Andrew Fairbairn, Jessica Thompson, and Parker VanValkenburgh
3.3. CSS For Success? Some Thoughts on Adapting the
Browser-Based Archaeological Recording Kit (ARK) for
Mobile Recording 373
J. Andrew Dufton
3.4. The Development of the PaleoWay: Digital Workflows in the
Context of Archaeological Consulting 399
Matthew Spigelman, Ted Roberts, and Shawn Fehrenbach
Part 4: From a Paper-based Past to a Paperless Future?
4.1. Slow Archaeology: Technology, Efficiency, and
Archaeological Work 421
William Caraher
4.2. Click Here to Save the Past 443
Eric C. Kansa
Part 5: From Critique to Manifesto
5.1. Response: Living a Semi-digital Kinda Life 475
Morag M. Kersel
5.2. Response: Mobilizing (Ourselves) for a Critical Digital
Archaeology 493
Adam Rabinowitz
Author Biographies 521

--- Page 11 ---


--- Page 12 ---
Preface & Acknowledgments
This volume stems from the workshop, “Mobilizing the Past for
a Digital Future: the Future of Digital Archaeology,” funded by a
National Endowment for the Humanities Digital Humanities Start-Up
grant (#HD-51851-14), which took place 27-28 February 2015 at Went-
worth Institute of Technology in Boston (http://uwm.edu/mobiliz-
ing-the-past/). The workshop, organized by this volume’s editors, was
largely spurred by our own attempts with developing a digital archae-
ological workflow using mobile tablet computers on the Athienou
Archaeological Project (http://aap.toumazou.org; Gordon et al., Ch.
1.4) and our concern for what the future of a mobile and digital archae-
ology might be. Our initial experiments were exciting, challenging,
and rewarding; yet, we were also frustrated by the lack of intra-dis-
ciplinary discourse between projects utilizing digital approaches to
facilitate archaeological data recording and processing.
Based on our experiences, we decided to initiate a dialogue that
could inform our own work and be of use to other projects struggling
with similar challenges. Hence, the “Mobilizing the Past” workshop
concept was born and a range of digital archaeologists, working
in private and academic settings in both Old World and New World
archaeology, were invited to participate. In addition, a livestream of
the workshop allowed the active participation on Twitter from over
21 countires, including 31 US states (@MobileArc15, #MobileArc).1
1 For commentary produced by the social media followers for this event, see:
https://twitter.com/electricarchaeo/status/571866193667047424, http://
shawngraham.github.io/exercise/mobilearcday1wordcloud.html, https://
twitter.com/electricarchaeo/status/571867092091338752, http://www.
diachronicdesign.com/blog/2015/02/28/15-mobilizing-the-past-for-the-dig-
ital-future-conference-day-1-roundup/.

--- Page 13 ---
vi
Although the workshop was initially aimed at processes of archae-
ological data recording in the field, it soon became clear that these
practices were entangled with larger digital archaeological systems
and even socio-economic and ethical concerns. Thus, the final work-
shop’s discursive purview expanded beyond the use of mobile devices
in the field to embrace a range of issues currently affecting digital
archaeology, which we define as the use of computerized, and espe-
cially internet-compatible and portable, tools and systems aimed at
facilitating the documentation and interpretation of material culture
as well as its publication and dissemination. In total, the workshop
included 21 presentations organized into five sessions (see program,
http://mobilizingthepast.mukurtu.net/digital-heritage/mobiliz-
ing-past-conference-program), including a keynote lecture by John
Wallrodt on the state of the field, “Why paperless?: Digital Tech-
nology and Archaeology,” and a plenary lecture by Bernard Frischer,
“The Ara Pacis and Montecitorio Obelisk of Augustus: A Simpirical
Investigation,” which explored how digital data can be transformed
into virtual archaeological landscapes.
The session themes were specifically devised to explore how
archaeological data was digitally collected, processed, and analyzed
as it moved from the trench to the lab to the digital repository. The
first session, “App/Database Development and Use for Mobile
Computing in Archaeology,” included papers primarily focused on
software for field recording and spatial visualization. The second
session, “Mobile Computing in the Field,” assembled a range of
presenters whose projects had actively utilized mobile computing
devices (such as Apple iPads) for archaeological data recording and
was concerned with shedding light on their utility within a range of
fieldwork situations. The third session, “Systems for Archaeological
Data Management,” offered presentations on several types of archae-
ological workflows that marshal born-digital data from the field to
publication, including fully bespoken paperless systems, do-it-your-
self (“DIY”) paperless systems, and hybrid digital-paper systems. The
fourth and final session, “Pedagogy, Data Curation, and Reflection,”
mainly dealt with teaching digital methodologies and the use of
digital repositories and linked open data to enhance field research.
This session’s final paper, William Caraher’s “Toward a Slow Archae-
ology,” however, noted digital archaeology’s successes in terms of

--- Page 14 ---
vii
time and money saved and the collection of more data, but also called
for a more measured consideration of the significant changes that
these technologies are having on how archaeologists engage with
and interpret archaeological materials.
The workshop’s overarching goal was to bring together leading
practitioners of digital archaeology in order to discuss the use,
creation, and implementation of mobile and digital, or so-called
“paperless,” archaeological data recording systems. Originally,
we hoped to come up with a range of best practices for mobile
computing in the field – a manual of sorts – that could be used by
newer projects interested in experimenting with digital methods, or
even by established projects hoping to revise their digital workflows
in order to increase their efficiency or, alternatively, reflect on their
utility and ethical implications. Yet, what the workshop ultimately
proved is that there are many ways to “do” digital archaeology, and
that archaeology as a discipline is engaged in a process of discovering
what digital archaeology should (and, perhaps, should not) be as we
progress towards a future where all archaeologists, whether they like
it or not, must engage with what Steven Ellis has called the “digital
filter.”
So, (un)fortunately, this volume is not a “how-to” manual. In
the end, there seems to be no uniform way to “mobilize the past.”
Instead, this volume reprises the workshop’s presentations—now
revised and enriched based on the meeting’s debates as well as the
editorial and peer review processes—in order to provide archaeolo-
gists with an extremely rich, diverse, and reflexive overview of the
process of defining what digital archaeology is and what it can and
should perhaps be. It also provides two erudite response papers that
together form a didactic manifesto aimed at outlining a possible
future for digital archaeology that is critical, diverse, data-rich, effi-
cient, open, and most importantly, ethical. If this volume, which we
offer both expeditiously and freely, helps make this ethos a reality, we
foresee a bright future for mobilizing the past.
* * *
No multifaceted academic endeavor like Mobilizing the Past can be
realized without the support of a range of institutions and individ-

--- Page 15 ---
viii
uals who believe in the organizers’ plans and goals. Thus, we would
like to thank the following institutions and individuals for their logis-
tical, financial, and academic support in making both the workshop
and this volume a reality. First and foremost, we extend our grati-
tude toward The National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH) for
providing us with a Digital Humanities Start-Up Grant (#HD-51851-
14), and especially to Jennifer Serventi and Perry Collins for their
invaluable assistance through the application process and beyond.
Without the financial support from this grant the workshop and
this publication would not have been possible. We would also like to
thank Susan Alcock (Special Counsel for Institutional Outreach and
Engagement, University of Michigan) for supporting our grant appli-
cation and workshop.
The workshop was graciously hosted by Wentworth Institute
of Technology (Boston, MA). For help with hosting we would like
to thank in particular Zorica Pantic´ (President), Russell Pinizzotto
(Provost), Charlene Roy (Director of Business Services), Patrick
Hafford (Dean, College of Arts and Sciences), Ronald Bernier (Chair,
Humanities and Social Sciences), Charles Wiseman (Chair, Computer
Science and Networking), Tristan Cary (Manager of User Services,
Media Services), and Claudio Santiago (Utility Coordinator, Physical
Plant).
Invaluable financial and logistical support was also generously
provided by the Department of Fine and Performing Arts and Spon-
sored Programs Administration at Creighton University (Omaha,
NE). In particular, we are grateful to Fred Hanna (Chair, Fine
and Performing Arts) and J. Buresh (Program Manager, Fine and
Performing Arts), and to Beth Herr (Director, Sponsored Programs
Administration) and Barbara Bittner (Senior Communications
Management, Sponsored Programs Administration) for assistance
managing the NEH grant and more. Additional support was provided
by The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee; in particular, David
Clark (Associate Dean, College of Letters and Science), and Kate
Negri (Academic Department Assistant, Department of Art History).
Further support was provided by Davidson College and, most impor-
tantly, we express our gratitude to Michael K. Toumazou (Director,
Athienou Archaeological Project) for believing in and supporting our

--- Page 16 ---
ix
research and for allowing us to integrate mobile devices and digital
workflows in the field.
The workshop itself benefitted from the help of Kathryn Grossman
(Massachusetts Institute of Technology) and Tate Paulette (Brown
University) for on-site registration and much more. Special thanks
goes to Daniel Coslett (University of Washington) for graphic design
work for both the workshop materials and this volume. We would
also like to thank Scott Moore (Indiana University of Pennsylvania)
for managing our workshop social media presence and his support
throughout this project from workshop to publication.
This publication was a pleasure to edit, thanks in no small part
to Bill Caraher (Director and Publisher, The Digital Press at the
University of North Dakota), who provided us with an outstanding
collaborative publishing experience. We would also like to thank
Jennifer Sacher (Managing Editor, INSTAP Academic Press) for her
conscientious copyediting and Brandon Olson for his careful reading
of the final proofs. Moreover, we sincerely appreciate the efforts
of this volume’s anonymous reviewers, who provided detailed,
thought-provoking, and timely feedback on the papers; their insights
greatly improved this publication. We are also grateful to Michael
Ashley and his team at the Center for Digital Archaeology for their
help setting up the accompanying Mobilizing the Past Mukurtu site
and Kristin M. Woodward of the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
Libraries for assistance with publishing and archiving this project
through UWM Digital Commons. In addition, we are grateful to the
volume’s two respondents, Morag Kersel (DePaul University) and
Adam Rabinowitz (University of Texas at Austin), who generated
erudite responses to the chapters in the volume. Last but not least, we
owe our gratitude to all of the presenters who attended the workshop
in Boston, our audience from the Boston area, and our colleagues
on Twitter (and most notably, Shawn Graham of Carlton University
for his word clouds) who keenly “tuned in” via the workshop’s lives-
tream. Finally, we extend our warmest thanks to the contributors of
this volume for their excellent and timely chapters. This volume, of
course, would not have been possible without such excellent papers.
As this list of collaborators demonstrates, the discipline of
archaeology and its digital future remains a vital area of interest for
people who value the past’s ability to inform the present, and who

--- Page 17 ---
x
recognize our ethical responsibility to consider technology’s role in
contemporary society. For our part, we hope that the experiences and
issues presented in this volume help to shape new intra-disciplinary
and critical ways of mobilizing the past so that human knowledge can
continue to develop ethically at the intersection of archaeology and
technology.
--------
Erin Walcek Averett (Department of Fine and Performing Arts and
Classical and Near Eastern Studies, Creighton University)
Jody Michael Gordon (Department of Humanities and Social Sciences,
Wentworth Institute of Technology)
Derek B. Counts (Department of Art History, University of Wiscon-
sin-Milwaukee)
October 1, 2016

--- Page 18 ---
How To Use This Book
The Digital Press at the University of North Dakota is a collaborative
press and Mobilizing the Past for a Digital Future is an open, collabora-
tive project. The synergistic nature of this project manifests itself in
the two links that appear in a box at the end of every chapter.
The first link directs the reader to a site dedicated to the book, which
is powered and hosted by the Center for Digital Archaeology’s (CoDA)
Mukurtu.net. The Murkutu application was designed to help indige-
nous communities share and manage their cultural heritage, but we
have adapted it to share the digital heritage produced at the “Mobi-
lizing the Past” workshop and during the course of making this book.
Michael Ashley, the Director of Technology at CoDA, participated in
the “Mobilizing the Past” workshop and facilitated our collaboration.
The Mukurtu.net site (https://mobilizingthepast.mukurtu.net) has
space dedicated to every chapter that includes a PDF of the chapter, a
video of the paper presented at the workshop, and any supplemental
material supplied by the authors. The QR code in the box directs
readers to the same space and is designed to streamline the digital
integration of the paper book.
The second link in the box provides open access to the individual
chapter archived within University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee’s instal-
lation of Digital Commons, where the entire volume can also be
downloaded. Kristin M. Woodward (UWM Libraries) facilitated the
creation of these pages and ensured that the book and individual
chapters included proper metadata.

--- Page 19 ---
xii
Our hope is that these collaborations, in addition to the open
license under which this book is published, expose the book to a
wider audience and provide a platform that ensures the continued
availability of the digital complements and supplements to the text.
Partnerships with CoDA and the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
reflect the collaborative spirit of The Digital Press, this project, and
digital archaeology in general.

--- Page 20 ---
Abbreviations
AAI Alexandria Archive Institute
AAP Athienou Archaeological Project
ABS acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (plastic)
ADS Archaeological Data Service
Alt-Acs Alternative Academics
API application programming interface
ARA archaeological resource assessment
ARC Australian Research Council
ARIS adaptive resolution imaging sonar
ASV autonomous surface vehicle
BLM Bureau of Land Management
BLOB Binary Large Object
BOR Bureau of Reclamation
BYOD bring your own device
CAD computer-aided design
CDL California Digital Library
CHDK Canon Hack Development Kit
cm centimeter/s
CMOS complementary metal-oxide semiconductor
CoDA Center for Digital Archaeology
COLLADA COLLAborative Design Activity
CRM cultural resource management
CSS Cascading Style Sheet
CSV comma separated values
DBMS desktop database management system
DEM digital elevation model
DINAA Digital Index of North American Archaeology
DIY do-it-yourself
DoD Department of Defense
DVL doppler velocity log
EAV entity-attribute-value
EDM electronic distance measurement
EU excavation unit/s
FAIMS Federated Archaeological Information Management
System
fMRI functional magnetic resonance imaging
GIS geographical information system
GCP ground control point
GNSS global navigation satellite system
GPR ground-penetrating radar

--- Page 21 ---
xiv
GUI graphic user interface
ha hectare/s
hr hour/s
Hz Hertz
HDSM high-density survey and measurement
ICE Image Composite Editor (Microsoft)
iOS iPhone operating system
INS inertial motion sensor
IPinCH Intellectual Property in Cultural Heritage
IT information technology
KAP Kaymakçı Archaeological Project
KARS Keos Archaeological Regional Survey
km kilometer/s
LABUST Laboratory for Underwater Systems and
Technologies (University of Zagreb)
LAN local area network
LIEF Linkage Infrastructure Equipment and Facilities
LOD linked open data
LTE Long-Term Evolution
m meter/s
masl meters above sea level
MEMSAP Malawi Earlier-Middle Stone Age Project
MOA memoranda of agreement
MOOC Massive Online Open Course
NGWSP Navajo-Gallup Water Supply Project
NeCTAR National eResearch Collaboration Tools and
Resources
NEH National Endowment for the Humanities
NHPA National Historic Preservation Act
NPS National Park Service
NRHP National Register of Historic Places
NSF National Science Foundation
OCR optical character reader
OS operating system
PA programmatic agreement
PAP pole aerial photography
PARP:PS Pompeii Archaeological Research Project: Porta
Stabia
PATA Proyecto Arqueológico Tuti Antiguo
PBMP Pompeii Bibliography and Mapping Project
PDA personal digital assistant

--- Page 22 ---
xv
PIARA Proyecto de Investigación Arqueológico Regional
Ancash
PKAP Pyla-Koutsopetra Archaeological Project
Pladypos PLAtform for DYnamic POSitioning
PLoS Public Library of Science
PQP Pompeii Quadriporticus Project
PZAC Proyecto Arqueológico Zaña Colonial
QA quality assurance
QC quality control
QR quick response
REVEAL Reconstruction and Exploratory Visualization:
Engineering meets ArchaeoLogy
ROS robot operating system
ROV remotely operated vehicle
RRN Reciprocal Research Network
RSS Rich Site Summary
RTK real-time kinetic global navigation satellite system
SfM structure from motion
SHPO State Historic Preservation Office
SKAP Say Kah Archaeological Project
SLAM simultaneous localization and mapping
SMU square meter unit/s
SU stratigraphic unit/s
SVP Sangro Valley Project
TCP traditional cultural properties
tDAR the Digital Archaeological Record
UAV unmanned aerial vehicle
UNASAM National University of Ancash, Santiago Antúnez de
Mayolo
UQ University of Queensland
USACE U.S. Army Corp of Engineers
USBL ultra-short baseline
USFS U.S. Forest Service
USV unmanned surface vehicle
UTM universal transverse mercator
XML Extensible Markup Language

--- Page 23 ---
3.2.
Measure Twice, Cut Once:
Cooperative Deployment of a Generalized,
Archaeology-Specific Field Data Collection
System
Adela Sobotkova, Shawn A. Ross, Brian Ballsun-Stanton,
Andrew Fairbairn, Jessica Thompson, and Parker
VanValkenburgh
[W]hen people use [mobile devices] they end up just using
technology to consume things instead of making things. With
a computer you can make things. You can code, you can make
things and create things that have never before existed and do
things that have never been done before.
That’s the problem with a lot of people . . . they don’t try to do
stuff that’s never been done before, so they never do anything,
but if they try to do it, they find out there’s lots of things they
can do that have never been done before.
Russell Kirsch, 20th-century computing pioneer (Runyon 2012)
Archaeologists face an immediate, fundamental decision once they
decide to digitize field data collection: put together a solution from
several pieces of general-purpose, usually proprietary, software aimed
at the commercial market (often supplemented by continuing use of
paper); commission a bespoke mobile application tailored to their
specific project; or use one of the growing number of “generalized,”
often open-source, platforms designed specifically for archaeological
fieldwork. Generalized software allows deep customization, adapting
to the user’s approach and procedures rather than requiring than the
user adapt to the software, while still being designed specifically for
archaeology. Examples of open-source, generalized (or at least highly

--- Page 24 ---
338
customizable) software developed with archaeological data in mind
include the Archaeological Recording Kit (ARK; http://ark.lparchae-
ology.com/; see also Dufton, Ch. 3.3), Heurist (http://heuristnetwork.
org/), and the subject of this paper, the Federated Archaeological Infor-
mation Management Systems (FAIMS; http://faims.edu.au/) mobile
platform. Bespoke applications can meet the particular requirements
of archaeological fieldwork, but producing and maintaining them
exceeds the resources of almost all projects or institutions. Commer-
cial data-entry applications offer lower barriers to entry (although it
remains resource-intensive in the long run), but they adapt poorly to
the exigencies of the field and require archaeologists to make many
compromises. Generalized, open-source tools designed for field
research bring the advantages of bespoke software within reach of
“typical” projects.
Perhaps more importantly, generalized tools also allow archaeol-
ogists to participate in software development, not merely consume
software. Such co-development involves a partnership between field
archaeologists and a software development team. This partnership
can ease the transitions from paper to digital fieldwork, illuminate
the advantages digital approaches offer, and ensure that software is
fit-to-purpose. Its benefits and rationale are analogous to those of
Open Context’s model of “data sharing as publication,” where data
editors collaborate with data creators (Kansa, Ch. 4.2). In this paper,
three project directors who co-developed and deployed a FAIMS
recording system in collaboration with the FAIMS team report their
experiences. Having first-hand experience of co-development, they
reflect on the challenges and benefits of working with the FAIMS
project team to produce a customized implementation of a general-
ized field recording system.
The FAIMS Project
The FAIMS project is a university-based, e-research initiative that
was launched in 2012 to develop national, domain-wide information
management infrastructure for archaeology and related disciplines
(Ross 2013, 2015; Sobotkova et al. 2015). It was initially based at the
University of New South Wales, Sydney, and funded by a grant from
the Australian National eResearch Collaboration Tools and Resources
(NeCTAR) eResearch Tools program (RT043; AUD $949,500). In consul-

--- Page 25 ---
339
tation with Australian and international archaeological communities,
the FAIMS project developed a generalized, mobile, offline, multi-
user collection platform for structured, free-text, geospatial, and
multimedia data (the “FAIMS mobile platform,” discussed below),
which entered public beta release in November 2013. The project also
supported enhancements to the Heurist online data refinement and
analysis service developed at the University of Sydney, and established
an Australian implementation of the Digital Archaeological Record
(tDAR; https://www.tdar.org/), an online data archive developed by
Digital Antiquity. In 2014, the FAIMS project received an Australian
Research Council (ARC) Linkage Infrastructure Equipment and Facili-
ties (LIEF) award (LE140100151; AUD $945,000 total ARC funding and
university co-investment), allowing a second phase of development
that emphasized field deployments of the mobile platform at partner
universities, three of which are presented in this paper. Experience
from these deployments informed ongoing development of FAIMS
software, resulting in the release of FAIMS 2.0, the current production
version, in November 2014 (FIGS. 1, 2). The project moved to Macquarie
University, Sydney, in January 2015.
The sustainability plan of the FAIMS project involves iterative
applications for research infrastructure funding, primarily through
the ARC LIEF program. LIEFs are matching grants that require partner
organizations (primarily universities) to contribute approximately
one-third to one-half of the total budget. Universities that commit
cash to a LIEF receive a commensurate amount of support from the
FAIMS project; the two Australian projects discussed in this paper fall
into this category. This infrastructure grant income is supplemented
by fees charged for customization, field support, server hosting, and
other services (a typical open-source business model; cf. Raymond
2001: 136; Popp 2015); the United States–based project discussed here
paid for services directly. To that end, we encourage research proj-
ects that plan to use FAIMS to include an appropriate budget line in
their grant applications. To date, fees have accounted for about 5%
of the FAIMS budget, with infrastructure grants constituting the
other 95%—although these figures exclude in-kind contributions of
time by academic staff and other participants, which, for example,
total approximately $100,000 per year at Macquarie University
alone. We envision that within five years, service fees will constitute
perhaps 25% of our budget, but the project will likely remain largely

--- Page 26 ---
Figure 1: The “Context” tab in the Boncuklu excavation module in
1.3 and 2.0 version of FAIMS on Nexus 7 and Nexus 9, respectively,
showing improvements in interface design.

--- Page 27 ---
Figure 2: The “Deposit” tab in the Boncuklu excavation module in
1.3 and 2.0 version of FAIMS on Nexus 7 and Nexus 9 respectively,
showing differences in the rendering of picture dictionaries, annota-
tion and certainty icons, module path and indicator bar.

--- Page 28 ---
342
dependent upon infrastructure grants and in-kind contributions. This
funding allows the FAIMS project to employ a professional software
engineering team (as well as student programmers) to ensure that
our software meets high standards and avoids some of the shortcom-
ings often associated with academic software (which often remains a
prototype, built to run on specific infrastructure at a particular time,
making it fragile and difficult to reuse in new contexts; cf. Sun 2012;
Might 2015).
The FAIMS Mobile Platform
The “core” software of the FAIMS mobile platform does a lot of
the “heavy lifting” required of archaeological software: automatic
synchronization of data among multiple users, maintaining record
histories for review and reversion of changes, backup, data export,
internal and external sensor management, and provision of a mobile
GIS. Since FAIMS is generalized, however, it has to be customized for
each project. Such a “deployment” involves tailoring the core software
by creating or modifying “definition documents,” primarily Extensible
Markup Language (XML) files, which produce customized data collec-
tion “modules” (Ross et al. 2015). Each module accommodates specific
data and workflow requirements, as required by different approaches
to archaeological survey, excavation, and artifact processing. So, for
example, the “Boncuklu excavation module” is an implementation of
FAIMS customized for single-context recording method as it is prac-
ticed at the excavation of a Neolithic tell in Turkey (see below).
The FAIMS project uses GitHub, an online version control tool
for collaborative software development, to publish and manage
individual modules (https://github.com/FAIMS; cf. Ross et al. 2015).
Software or other text documents stored on GitHub can be down-
loaded, edited, copied, and adapted at will. As an example, in 2013, the
FAIMS team developed a “deluxe excavation” module, which provided
the foundation for the three deployments discussed here (Boncuklu
Höyük in central Turkey, the Malawi Earlier-Middle Stone Age Project
(MEMSAP), and Proyecto Arqueológico Zaña Colonial (PAZC) in Peru).
This module was duplicated (“forked”) and modified to meet the needs
of each project. Using GitHub not only made the definition documents
for all four modules (the original plus the three adaptations) publicly
available, but it also allowed for the most useful changes to each of the

--- Page 29 ---
343
derivative modules to be incorporated (“pulled”) back into the orig-
inal “deluxe excavation” module. Users can now choose whichever of
these four modules best fits the requirements of their own fieldwork
(the three customized modules can be found in the Supplementary
Material folder). It has been a guiding principle of FAIMS to build a
growing library of modules that accommodate as many archaeolog-
ical activities, and variations of them, as possible.
Customizing and Deploying the FAIMS Mobile Platform
The Mobile Platform consists of an Android mobile application (avail-
able on Google Play) and a Linux server (available on GitHub). All
FAIMS project software is free and open source (GPLv.3 license). The
mobile software will run on most recent Android devices (current spec-
ifications are available from http://www.faims.edu.au/). The server
either can be a local, physical computer or can reside online. Users
with the time and expertise can implement FAIMS themselves, or they
can purchase that service from the FAIMS team. Two small projects,
both undertaken by doctoral students, have successfully customized
and deployed their own systems. Most users, however, have chosen to
purchase customization and support services from the FAIMS team; to
date, we have created 19 workflows for 17 projects and supported 11 of
them in the field since the public release of our software in November
2013. That number is likely to double by the end of 2017.
Users can establish a local or online server themselves by installing
Linux (specifically, the most recent Long Term Service release of
Ubuntu) and executing a few commands to download and install the
FAIMS server software. Once in the field, the server is essentially an
appliance that synchronizes devices and performs automatic backups,
requiring little attention. Users only access the server (via a Web
interface from any other device on the network) to adjust controlled
vocabularies, manage users, view record histories and revert changes,
export data, and perform other administrative tasks. For those new
to the system, the FAIMS project offers temporary, pre-configured,
online servers for trials at no cost.
For users who want to purchase a pre-configured server, the FAIMS
project has established relationships with vendors in Australia and
the United States who can provide and support local or online servers.
Purchasing a pre-configured local server with all necessary hardware

--- Page 30 ---
Figure 3: The spectrum of customization options.

--- Page 31 ---
345
costs AUD $1,700–$3,500 from one of these vendors (excluding tablets).
Alternatively, an online or local server can be leased for approximately
AUD $150–$200 per month. In the case studies presented below,
Boncuklu and MEMSAP purchased preconfigured local servers, while
PAZC used an online server (but later switched to a local server in a
subsequent season).
After the establishment of a server, do-it-yourself users can
customize the mobile application for their own work in four ways,
which require progressively more effort and technical expertise, but
also allow more nuanced control over the resulting module:
1. Reuse an existing module as-is, which requires only downloading
the application from Google Play and selecting the desired module
from a list;
2. Use Heurist (an online data service), which provides a graphic user
interface for the generation of definition documents (suitable for
relatively simple modules);
3.Use a simplified module generator, which requires writing a
single XML file that generates definition documents (suitable for
modules of moderate complexity);
4.Modify an existing module, or create a new one, by editing the
definition documents directly, which requires proficiency with
XML and BeanShell (a scripting language).
The FAIMS project has developed extensive documentation to assist
users who want to establish their own server and customize their
modules using any of these approaches (https://www.fedarch.org/
support/#2), which was improved recently through a 2015 NeCTAR
grant specifically targeted at user support. The project team provides
free support on a time-available basis.
Thus far, however, most users have approached the FAIMS team
for customization services, including those in the case studies
presented here. In such cases, we employ a combination of the third
and fourth methods described above, automating whatever code
generation we can to reduce development costs, while maintaining
fine-grained control over data structures, user interfaces, and auto-
mation where necessary. When a project hires the FAIMS team to
adapt an existing module or develop a new one, this service generally
costs approximately AUD $1,500–$15,000 per season for the mobile

--- Page 32 ---
346
platform, depending on the complexity and novelty of the recording
system required. Deployments of a module for subsequent seasons
are usually less expensive because users only pay for changes and
support. Customization and support work for the Boncuklu and
MEMSAP projects presented here, for example, was valued about
$15,000 each for their first year of deployment (but only $3,250 for a
subsequent deployment for Boncuklu). Because the PAZC project was
willing to reuse an existing module, their first year cost only $900
(a subsequent deployment cost $2,400, after they identified some
additional modifications), illustrating the savings that redeployment
can offer. These costs include support for the duration of fieldwork
and assistance with data export (we fix bugs and other errors at no
additional charge, but users pay for significant in-field changes and
priority support). As will be seen below, customization and support
costs of this magnitude can be largely recouped from later savings in
data digitization and reconciliation, aside from any other benefits of
digital recording (cf. Spigelman et al., Ch. 3.4). Finally, the FAIMS team
also offers development-in-trade for in-kind help with testing, docu-
mentation, and other activities to students, another common practice
in open-source communities.
It is our hope that by building free and open-source software to
high standards using research infrastructure funding, by providing
extensive documentation and as much support as possible for
do-it-yourselfers, by building a library of modules for various activi-
ties, and by offering customization, deployment, and support services
at a reasonable cost, we can deliver purpose-built field-recording soft-
ware to projects and organizations who otherwise could not afford it.
Between Off-the-Shelf and Bespoke Software
Software development strategies fall along a spectrum (FIG. 3). On
one end are consumer-grade, “general purpose,” desktop database
management systems (DBMS) with graphical user interfaces, which
put “simple” customization into archaeologists’ hands. At the other
end sits bespoke software development, where archaeologists (for
example) request features they want, as they would select cloth from
a high-end tailor making a custom suit, and software developers
produce a tailored mobile application from scratch.

--- Page 33 ---
347
FAIMS lies near the middle of this spectrum. Compared to a
general-purpose DBMS, FAIMS is “generalized” in the sense it has
no predetermined data schemas or user interface, instead offering a
degree of control over data structures and forms similar to DBMSes
like Microsoft Access or FileMaker Pro. It is not general-purpose,
however, in that it has been purpose built to perform well under diffi-
cult field conditions and includes functionality specifically requested
by archaeologists (through stocktaking activities, cf. Ross et al.
2013). As a result, for a customization effort similar to that required
by a general-purpose DBMS, researchers get software optimized for
archaeological fieldwork.
For illustration, one example of a fieldwork-specific feature is the
capacity of FAIMS to synchronize across many devices in a degrad-
ed-network environment. Most DBMSes store data on a single server
that can be accessed by many clients. Mobile applications also typi-
cally use this architecture, which is simpler and has performance
advantages. These applications, however, expect a regular—if not
continuous—connection to a server. Archaeological fieldwork
frequently suffers from intermittent or disrupted network commu-
nications. To accommodate these conditions, devices running FAIMS
have no need for a continuous connection to maintain data integ-
rity; they happily operate offline and synchronize whenever a Wi-Fi
network is available (according to configurable rules). The FileMaker
application and DBMS, conversely, have been designed for more
“normal” deployment situations, and they operate grudgingly in a
network-degraded field environment, requiring work-arounds when
asked to collect data simultaneously on multiple offline devices. An
example of such work-arounds regarding synchronization and offline
use is seen with FileMaker:
For real-time access to the most up-to-date information, host
solutions with FileMaker Server. For this option, purchase of
concurrent connections is required along with access to a local
wireless or cellular network. Or to share your solutions offline,
copy files to FileMaker Go using iTunes File Sharing, email or
AirDrop (FileMaker 2015).
Keeping a change history and managing geospatial data are even
more difficult. It does not make sense for FileMaker to optimize for

--- Page 34 ---
348
these unusual conditions, as they require significant trade-offs in
complexity and performance, and return benefits only in specific and
limited situations. FileMaker was designed for everyone; FAIMS was
developed around the expressed requirements of archaeologists to
manage the high-friction environment of fieldwork.
FAIMS offers similar optimization for other issues specific to field-
work, such as the need to collect a variety of data, work in multilingual
settings, and promote the production of compatible datasets for
large-scale, synthetic research. FAIMS tightly binds the diverse data
fieldwork generates (e.g., structured, free text, geospatial, and multi-
media), connects to internal and external sensors, allows tracking
and reverting changes to the data, supports customizable data export
in a variety of common formats, translates the interface between
languages or conceptual vocabularies, and maps local concepts to
open, linked-data vocabularies (thus promoting both syntactic and
semantic data compatibility; cf. Limp 2011: 277–279; Wallrodt, Ch. 1.1).
These fieldwork-specific capabilities get inherited by each module;
they need not be newly programmed upon user request. They are
all there waiting on users to take advantage of them (or not). This
combination of flexibility and domain-specific features is what makes
FAIMS “generalized.”
A bespoke Android or iOS app, if properly resourced and designed,
may outperform FAIMS for any single data collection task, but at
considerable cost. The requirements gathering, planning, develop-
ment, and testing required to produce software reliable enough for
field archaeology are expensive and demanding. Even after develop-
ment is “complete,” software has significant maintenance costs such
as bug-fixing and keeping up with the biennial mobile OS update
cycle (not to mention updates to other components of the software
“stack” that underlies every application). These development and
maintenance costs are beyond the resources of all but the best-funded
projects and organizations, such as is iDig, created by the Athenian
Agora Excavations of the American School of Classical Studies (http://
idig.tips/; cf. Fee, Ch. 2.1). Because the core FAIMS software is common
to all deployments, however, the fixed costs of development and
maintenance can be shared across many users, projects, and institu-
tions. Improvements that benefit all users can be made incrementally
as resources come available. This shared core library also allows
customization and deployment to be accomplished more quickly
than bespoke development. A generalized, but fieldwork-specific,

--- Page 35 ---
349
application has the potential to attract a large enough user base to
sustain it (cf. Kansa, Ch. 4.2).
The Nature of Co-Development
Participating in open-source development is different from buying
software from a vendor. There are responsibilities, trade-offs, and
significant benefits. Instead of purchasing a finished product, which
can either be accepted or rejected, open-source tools can be re-in-
vented and co-developed to fit specific needs. As a generalized
platform, FAIMS must be customized by the researchers who use it.
This co-development increases the likelihood that individual proj-
ects will achieve their goals, but it also requires archaeologists’ active
participation and willingness to reconsider information management
during fieldwork.
Developing a data capture and management system for an
archaeological project using FAIMS constitutes a miniature software
deployment project. To an extent, the same is true of development
using desktop DBMSes like Microsoft Access or FileMaker, but FAIMS
is perhaps more transparent about it, in that development is accom-
plished through editing text files rather than manipulating a graphic
user interface. The apparent ease of development provided by mass-
market DBMSes seduces users into thinking that information systems
can be built and maintained with minimal investment or technical
expertise. Eventually, however, even desktop DBMSes require consid-
erable scripting to accommodate archaeological workflows. As a
result, the landscape is littered with half-finished or abandoned data-
bases created using desktop systems (including, admittedly, several
built by some of this paper’s co-authors). Because the software devel-
opment looks easy, projects under-resource it.
FAIMS treats complex archaeological work with the seriousness
it deserves. The FAIMS approach, partly dictated by the nature of
the software and partly by our experience, has us treat each deploy-
ment as an authentic, miniature software development project that
requires proper “scoping” (requirements gathering, software design,
and development planning), coding, and “quality assurance” (testing
at each step of development to ensure that software works and is
fit-to-purpose). As such, the authors believe that our experience also
offers lessons to those who choose to customize commercial DBMS
software.

--- Page 36 ---
350
Three Case Studies and Three Themes of Observation
The three FAIMS implementation case studies presented here include:
(1) a Neolithic tell excavation in central Turkey, (2) a Middle Stone Age
excavation and surface survey in Malawi, and (3) a late Prehispanic/
early Colonial excavation in coastal Peru. Three researchers, one from
each case-study site, generously offered to share and discuss their
experiences deploying FAIMS during 2014 fieldwork. They took the
time to complete post-project questionnaires, and also exchanged
many emails and chat messages with the FAIMS team before, during,
and after their fieldwork. These sources provide the quotations below;
their complete, unedited communications with the FAIMS project
are available via the digital supplement to this volume (see the files
contained in Supplementary Material 1: “Fairbairn: Boncuklu Case
Study”; “Fairbairn: Chat Log.pdf”; “Thompson: Malawi Case Study”;
“VanValkenburgh: PAZC Case Study”). Their observations can be
woven into three themes, demonstrating common challenges,
concerns, and benefits shared across all three projects.
Andrew Fairbairn, an Australian Research Council (ARC) Future
Fellow and Associate Professor at University of Queensland (UQ),
co-directs excavations at the Neolithic tell of Boncuklu Höyük
(Boncuklu) in central Turkey (Baird et al. 2012; http://boncuklu.org/).
About his site, he wrote:
One peculiarity of the site is its extremely fine layering and
the complex intercutting of archaeological features, caused by
rebuilding of houses on the same site time and time again. . . .
[a single context in] Boncuklu may be resolved within <5 cm of
deposit. . . . As a result, excavation has necessarily been fine-
grained, utilising a single context recording method better to
understand the subtle interrelationships of the site’s building
sequences and extra-mural areas. Single context recording
describes each deposit, cut and feature in detail, including
spatial coordinates and contexts (artefacts, samples) as well as
basic descriptives (form, size, etc).
Jessica Thompson, then an ARC Postdoctoral Research Fellow also
at UQ (now an Assistant Professor at Emory University), directed the

--- Page 37 ---
351
Malawi Earlier-Middle Stone Age Project (MEMSAP), which included
excavation and pedestrian survey (Thomson et. al. 2015; http://
memsap.org/). Of their project, she wrote:
MEMSAP based its excavation recording system on a single-con-
text form-based system modified from Marean et al. (2010).
Given the range of backgrounds represented on the project,
it was desirable that the recording protocols contain as many
checks and constraints as possible, but also that there was
ample opportunity to freehand any observations that may not
fit into one of the pre-designated categories.
Parker VanValkenburgh, then an Assistant Professor at the University
of Vermont (now an Assistant Professor at Brown University), directed
the Proyecto Arqueológico Zaña Colonial (PAZC), a multidisciplinary
project focusing on late Preshipanic and early colonial Peru that
includes excavation (VanValkenburgh 2012). He wrote:
In our 2012 field season at Carrizales, PAZC team members
recorded data using a single-context recording system on paper
forms. We also drew orthographic illustrations on large-format
millimetric graph paper and captured digital photographs of
the tops and bottoms of each excavated context.
Theme 1: Upfront Costs, Backend Payouts
One of the themes that emerged from these case studies involves the
shift in time and energy from digitization and cleansing of data at the
end of the project, to scoping, development, and testing of recording
systems at the beginning of the project. Even considering the up-front
time requirement, however, time savings at the end of the project
were substantial—even revolutionary; an entire season’s data could
be retrieved immediately, without tedious digitization and the errors
it inevitably introduces (cf. Spigelman et al., Ch. 3.4).

--- Page 38 ---
352
Scoping and Development
Requirements gathering, planning, and development is a lengthy,
iterative process that requires frequent communication, consulta-
tion, and feedback. Established projects with stable procedures have
an advantage during software customization, since they can artic-
ulate requirements and priorities quickly and coherently. Even so,
field projects with complex workflows still require several months
for development to ensure that the end product satisfies their needs.
Thompson commented on the numerous discussions and feedback
loops she engaged in during module scoping and prototype testing:
Prior to the field season, the FAIMS leadership team met
with several of its partners at UQ, including those involved
in MEMSAP. . . . Several hours were spent in discussions with
all senior project personnel to ensure that all data types they
wanted recorded were represented in the modules, and then
after the workshop detailed plans for the tab layout and controls
were developed mainly by the project leader but in consulta-
tion with other project personnel. . . . Ultimately only three
iterations of the excavation module and two iterations of the
survey module were needed before a functional system could
be deployed in the field. However, this was likely because all of
the data categories and relationships had been worked out—in
paper version—over the course of previous field seasons.
Converting from paper to digital workflows is an involved and
time-consuming process. It requires making the implicit knowledge
embedded in paper forms explicit. Digital forms are also more formal-
ized and restrictive than paper forms; relationships between entities,
controlled vocabularies, and other aspects of the data model must
be defined and encoded (cf. Gordon et al., Ch. 1.4; Motz, Ch. 1.3, who
had to write full protocol manuals to ensure users understood their
data model). Paper forms can approximate the desired data collec-
tion strategy, with exceptions, omissions, and edge cases written in
the margins or on the back of the form. Despite some FAIMS features
like the “annotations” field embedded in all attributes where users can
make contextual notes, which reproduce the freedom of the paper page
(cf. Ellis, Ch. 1.2), digital forms must be more precise and complete, or

--- Page 39 ---
353
their primary advantage—the production of clean, consistent data—is
lost. The conversion from fuzzy paper forms to sharp digital recording
often instigates a thorough review and revision of existing recording
procedures and workflows. Fairbairn noted the benefit of this revision
process:
In the process of defining the parameters of the future FAIMS
module I also got the opportunity to thoroughly review and
refine the Boncuklu recording system to the last field and attri-
bute, which identified some redundancies and allowed better
definition of the attributes expected in the system.
The critical resource during software development is time, which
may be allocated to scoping, to developing new features, to improving
performance, or to testing, bug fixing, and ensuring fitness for purpose.
Since time is a finite resource, these activities must be balanced against
one another. At some point, the archaeologist must finalize their data
model—their list of entities, attributes, and vocabularies—so that
development can end and testing may begin, with enough time to fix
and finalize the module before fieldwork starts. The “perfect” module
may be a moving target, and the perfect can become the enemy of the
good. Sometimes we should settle for good, but imperfect, software to
do fieldwork. In order to collect useful data while controlling the time
spent on scoping and development, Fairbairn recommends:
Consider your recording needs in depth well before deployment
of your module and learn to articulate those needs explicitly.
Time is money and imprecise, poorly articulated demands
increased the developers’ time on this module. Provide precise
instructions and well-articulated aims to your developers.
VanValkenburgh followed this advice, and his module was produced
quickly:
The total time that elapsed between first contact with FAIMS
leadership and deployment of the finished PAZC module was
approximately three and a half weeks.

--- Page 40 ---
354
The PAZC module also benefited from reusing the Boncuklu module
with some modifications (emphasizing the advantages of an open
source, document-based customization strategy: modules can be
rapidly modified and redeployed, while each new module or modifi-
cation improves the whole system). The FAIMS team translated the
Boncuklu module into Spanish and customized it where required by
editing the Boncuklu definition documents, a process that required
less than one week after the requirements were fully specified. The
speed of production was possible because of VanValkenburgh’s prag-
matism and willingness to adapt an existing module. As this example
illustrates, a system with a generalized core can spawn new deploy-
ments rapidly in a way that neither bespoke nor general-purpose
systems can.
Testing and Training
To test, or not to test—that is the question: Whether ’tis nobler
in the mind to suffer the slings and arrows of crashes and incor-
rectly implemented features or to allocate development time
against a sea of trouble tickets and by opposing end them. To
ship, to commit no more—and by shipping we end normal
development and the thousand emails that development is heir
to.
Brian Ballsun-Stanton (after a late night of bug-fixing)
Software development requires that scoping, programming, and
testing be finite, limited, and in balance with one another. In the FAIMS
experience, archaeologists tended to prioritize the development of
new features at the expense of testing. This is hardly surprising, as
feature development is exciting and novel, as opposed to the rote, but
essential, work of testing. While feature planning is rewarding and
creative, it must be kept in check, and it cannot outrun the resources
available for ensuring performance, quality, and fitness to purpose:
“Testing the module prior to fieldwork ensured it was technically
functional, and allowed for communication of changes that would be
hard done remotely” (Thompson).

--- Page 41 ---
355
All project directors tested their modules ahead of fieldwork, but
eventually they all regretted not doing so more thoroughly, with more
participants, and in more authentic situations.
Thompson realized the shortfalls of her own testing only when she
was in the field:
Once in the field the use of modules revealed other usability
issues that varied across the team. Simulation of fieldwork is
highly advised here. Or better yet, training a project novice in
the use of the module is where potential misunderstandings (of
the workflow) become apparent.
Fairbairn, too, found a problem of fitness-to-purpose on the first day
of fieldwork that had slipped through his earlier testing: “A significant
problem with the app design has arisen. It is one that I flagged earlier
but somehow it got through my later checks . . .”. Fairbairn’s module
had to be updated while live in the field. Live updates, designed for
situations like this one (where a problem is identified after deploy-
ment) can be useful (cf. Fee, Ch. 2.1), but they pose risks of failure due
to the lack of testing and should be avoided.
Hardware can cause its own problems, such as device-specific
bugs. Software that worked during internal testing by the FAIMS team
(or even by archaeologists prior to fieldwork) did not always work on
different tablets, even if they were made by the same manufacturer.
These compatibility problems are the price paid for the wide range
of devices offered within the Android ecosystem. It therefore proved
necessary to test the FAIMS mobile platform on each device. Fairbairn
explained the importance of specific and realistic testing:
Test your module and, if you are using multiple tablets, the
server and its system extensively before you depart for the field
with real data including every field and recording type you
may use; bugs may be hard to find and you need to be sure the
system works for your needs.
Several months may sound like a long time for complex module devel-
opment, but for a typical software development project it is a very short
timeframe. While the FAIMS approach of customizing generalized

--- Page 42 ---
356
software can produce recording systems faster than bespoke soft-
ware development (Kitchenham et al. 2002), the modules still require
extensive testing. The amount of testing necessary is a product of the
complexity of the module, the degree of automation and flow logic
it incorporates, and other features like GIS integration, translation,
or multimedia file management. The rigor of testing determines the
quality of the fieldwork experience and resultant data, which from the
perspective of the FAIMS team, make it worth a significant investment
of everyone’s time.
The Payoff: Clean, Granular, Digital Data
After fieldwork, the FAIMS team asked each of the project directors to
reflect on the design, development, and deployment of their module,
and tell us what they found the most worthwhile payoff for their
efforts.
Fairbairn appreciated having his data available to him shortly after
the end of fieldwork, especially the ease of export into the desktop
software he normally uses (Microsoft Access). He received his comma
separated value (CSV; a standard spreadsheet-type format) data files
and created an Access database from them, all in the time before the
paper forms (used as a backup to FAIMS as part of the transition to
digital recording) arrived at Australia:
[I have received the CSV file and] the data are present and
useable. I am now waiting for [the other project director] to send
me the forms . . . (excerpted from Google Hangouts between
Brian and Andrew Fairbairn, 18 September 2014)
VanValkenburgh enjoyed the “richness and integrity” of digitally-born
data:
[ . . . ] our final review of data collected by the PAZC in 2014
suggests that using FAIMS improved both the richness and
integrity of our data. Context descriptions are generally more
detailed, and the range of fields in the FAIMS default module
meant that project members recorded types of data (such

--- Page 43 ---
357
as parameters of soil matrices and inclusions) that we had
formerly treated in an inconsistent fashion.
Thompson agreed, noting the benefits would accrue over multiple
field seasons:
The FAIMS data outputs [ . . . ] required [ . . . ] much less cleaning,
organization, and streamlining for consistency than transcribed
data. [ . . . ] However, it was clear that once this initial hurdle
was overcome it would be far faster and error-free to append
FAIMS data from subsequent seasons onto these merged data-
bases than to return to a paper form recording system.
The data management benefits were especially clear in the MEMSAP
survey team’s change of opinion over the quality of survey data when
collected with tablets. Thompson emphasized the improved consis-
tency of data and the value of having various types of data (structured,
geospatial, and image) automatically linked, something that is diffi-
cult to implement with general-purpose database software:
When the survey data were examined and analysed during
post-season work, it became very clear to the survey team that
the tablets presented a huge advantage. During post-processing
all the data were tied together already and did not require the
manual integration of paper forms with separate photo logs
and GPS records—nor did they suffer from the inevitable tran-
scription error that in this case cost at least six person-hours
to investigate and rectify. There were fewer errors made in data
recording with the tablets, and the pre-defined categories made
the data far easier to sort, search, and analyse. When the scope
of data entry, cleaning, analysis, and archiving is considered,
the tablets saved at least eight person-days of work, although
this may have been an extreme case because one of the main
post-season challenges [during previous seasons] was the inte-
gration of both paper and tablet data into a single database.
Fairbairn also quantified the time-savings and cost-benefit of clean,
born-digital data to his project:

--- Page 44 ---
358
The greatest gains in the FAIMS system were found after the
excavation season was finished with post-processing of the
data and checking taking 2–3 hours in comparison to several
hundred hours for entry of the >300 context records gener-
ated in a typical season. This saving in paid RA time equates
to c. AU$5,000–10,000 per annum. Post-processing required
specialist input by FAIMS to extract CSV files from the data
tarball [.tar, a common Linux file archive similar to .zip], but
the outcome was easily accessible and useable data which can
be uploaded to a database. In the Boncuklu case the CSV tables
did not match the legacy database, however, some relatively
quick (0.5–1 day) [edits] … allowed the data to be uploaded. The
benefits to the excavation project in financial/labour terms are
hugely significant, equating to a total of 1–1.5 days of handling
time using FAIMS against 25–30 days when not in use per
annum, in other words a 95% labour saving.
Finally, Fairbairn discovered an unexpected benefit of having his
digital data available immediately: the timely discovery of errors.
“I also can see all the inconsistent entries that were made by people
who should know better.” His data was digital and ready for review
promptly at the end of the season, which revealed problems that
would otherwise have gone undetected until the paper forms were
digitized—perhaps months later—when the errors would have been
far more difficult to correct. Even when digital data creation does not
prevent errors, it exposes them.
While many projects prefer to collect data first and spend effort
cleaning it later, our partners chose to invest effort before fieldwork, in
order to have cleaner, richer data for immediate analysis. Learning the
capabilities of FAIMS software and engaging in the scoping and testing
required by co-development all took more time before fieldwork than
producing paper forms would have. After fieldwork, however, they
got rich, well-structured data at the push of a button, while errors
and inconsistencies in the data could be detected immediately rather
than during later digitization or processing. Fairbairn and Thompson
could readily quantify the savings in time and resources this trade-off
produced; based on their experience, most projects would likely come
out ahead.

--- Page 45 ---
359
The Importance of High-Quality Support
Exceptional support is necessary when deploying new technology
in the field, especially software that is purpose-built for the research
community (Fisher et al. 2010). Only the availability of high-quality
and timely support can provide the peace of mind necessary for archae-
ologists to risk moving from commercial software to new systems
designed specifically for our domain. The FAIMS team’s provision of
such support proved crucial to the success of field deployments. To
date, the FAIMS project has provided support as part of the module
development package.
Thompson makes the importance of support very clear:
The app has been such an incredible advantage in terms of
workload, data quality, and a number of other data manage-
ment issues with which archaeologists regularly have to deal.
It readily links disparate data types that are otherwise stored
separately—such as photographs, tabular logs, and context
relationships. I can see this user-friendly app being easily
transferrable to other projects, and the support team has been
brilliant. The hardware system was also quite remarkable in the
way that it collected data, then synced and backed it up daily.
Even projects like ours where we have no electricity on site can
use the setup as long as there is power back at the home base.
There were the usual start-up bugs, but the FAIMS team has
already done an immeasurable amount of work to remedy all
of them. From this already very exciting start, I can only see the
FAIMS initiative becoming even more of a boon to archaeolo-
gists everywhere.
From the perspective of the FAIMS team, the biggest challenges were
(1) communicating with archaeologists in remote locations, and (2)
reproducing software errors back at our office. The stochastic nature
of communication across time zones, often using unreliable channels,
hampered technical support. Instruction in the effective reporting of
bugs and other problems was also necessary, especially from remote
locations under the stress of fieldwork. Once identified and repro-
duced by the FAIMS team, bugs were quickly fixed, unclear workflows
were explained, and alternative paths around design shortcomings

--- Page 46 ---
360
were developed—but accurately reporting problems so that they can
be reproduced is an acquired skill.
Over time and with use, software becomes more mature, and fewer
bugs and problems arise. Developers and users can also cooperate
to produce documentation that gradually replaces live support. For
the innovators and early adopters introducing new technologies to
complex projects, however, there is no substitute for patient, timely,
and comprehensive support from developers.
Theme 2: Trade-Offs and Shared Lessons
The shared responsibilities of developers and researchers are perhaps
clearest in the context of the trade-offs between features and perfor-
mance that must be made during the production of a field recording
system. Each of these choices can have serious consequences when
the final system is put under the stress of a full deployment. Two
seemingly minor decisions, the use of complicated autonumbering,
and the choice between local and online servers, offer examples of
such trade-offs.
Legacy Features vs Performance:
How to Auto-Generate Smart Context Numbers
One of the major deployment challenges the FAIMS team experienced
was archaeologists’ requirement that FAIMS reproduce complicated
context numbering schemes. These numbers did more than identify
a context, they also encoded multiple pieces of information about it.
Archaeologists wanted these numbers to be generated automatically
and validated against all other records in the database to ensure they
were properly ordered and unique.
Some of the project directors asked for auto-generated context
“numbers” (actually alphanumeric identifiers) that would conform
to legacy systems inherited from paper forms; for example, “Context
name|HHAB” (Fairbairn) or “2228|SS|11|I|F5” (Thompson). These
identifiers had to be generated according to specific rules to avoid
duplication, ensure sequential numbering, and eliminate gaps (i.e.,
reuse identifiers that had been deleted). While FAIMS did automat-
ically generate such identifiers, doing so slowed performance. Each

--- Page 47 ---
361
time a new context was opened and an identifier generated, the soft-
ware had to read every record in the database, parse related records to
determine the next appropriate identifier, and write the new number
according to specific rules, all the while checking it against a growing
list of existing identifiers for duplication, omission, and sequential
order. The FAIMS team anticipated that this process would slow the
software down, but it was difficult to communicate the seriousness of
the threat. Performance degradation was barely perceptible during
testing, which involved only a few records, but it worsened exponen-
tially as the database grew (more precisely, as a square function of
the number of records). Fairbairn commented: “More serious was the
slowdown of the system halfway through its period of use. A record
which initially took 20 minutes to input took over an hour due to slow
syncing and updating.” VanValkenburgh agreed: “These improve-
ments (digital data) have come at a cost—namely, less efficient data
collection in the field. While we have yet to keep time-on-task records
for either paper-based recording or FAIMS, project members univer-
sally reported that data entry using FAIMS took longer than using our
previous analog system.”
Thompson’s “2228|SS|11|I|F5” identifier, for example, encapsu-
lates the distinct attributes of LotID, Site Code, Context ID, AreaCode,
and Grid Location Reference. Five variables combined into one code
may be easy for humans to read (although they can become obscure
to future users of the data if coding sheets are not included with the
data), but it is resource-intensive for machines to parse, especially
when each variable is subject to a different set of rules. The imple-
mentation of this five-variables-in-one-field feature was possible, but
it reduced performance and cost significant development time, which
could have been better spent on other features or on testing.
This slowdown was avoidable because the actual information
encoded in the context identifier can be captured in ways that do
not compromise performance. Those five pieces of information did
not have to be forced into the context identifier. Instead, they can be
stored normally in five separate fields. The critical part of the iden-
tifier (the context number) can be automatically incremented from a
manually assigned starting number (a “seed”). Assignment of seeds
to individual devices, combined with server-side validation after all
devices synchronize, ensures uniqueness of the critical portion of the
overall identifier without performance degradation. The five separate

--- Page 48 ---
362
fields can be concatenated on export into a combined identifier to
maintain the expected output.
Context numbering illustrates a larger issue. The question of
“how closely do we duplicate our paper forms” is common to archae-
ological projects that are going digital. It is worthwhile to step back
and consider the purpose behind legacy recording approaches, and
weigh the problems and benefits of replicating them. Sometimes
automation of a faithful replica is desirable and worth the cost in
development time and performance, but at other times, a more robust
digital approach will capture the purpose of legacy system, save time,
improve performance, and offer additional benefits (in this case,
verbose, human-readable context information that does not require
decoding a complex identifier). In 2015, both continuing projects
(Fairbairn’s and VanValkenburgh’s) chose simpler context numbering
approaches.
Local vs Online Servers
Like most databases, the FAIMS mobile platform is a server-centered
system, although client devices are coupled more loosely than usual
to the server. The FAIMS server can take different forms. A virtualized
instance of the server can run online (e.g., in the Australian NeCTAR
Research Cloud) or on client laptops, or clients can commission a
customized and preconfigured hardware package (“FAIMS-in-a-box”)
with a dedicated server, network equipment, and certified tablets. Each
hardware option has its trade-offs, which project directors will need to
consider. Purchasing a FAIMS-in-a-box is more expensive than renting
an online server and a suite of tablets for short-term deployments,
but it offers greater reliability and faster synchronization, completely
avoiding Internet connectivity and bandwidth problems that plague
remote (and sometimes not-so-remote) locations. An online server
required less attention from archaeologists than a hardware server,
and was not subject to the wear-and-tear, intermittent electricity, and
other hazards of deployment in the field. Different options are avail-
able because each project has different needs. Fairbairn had the best
experience using FAIMS-shipped hardware:
Also, it is worth noting that the equipment—FAIMS-in-
a-box—worked very well and with the exception of 1 tablet

--- Page 49 ---
363
screen—cracked when an item fell on it from the edge of the
trench—came through the season in great condition. This was
in spite of very dusty conditions and a somewhat unreliable
electricity supply. The server worked throughout and the [wifi]
provided excellent coverage (75–80% signal strength at 80m,
the furthest excavation trench. The server hung only once,
when the UPS plug was knocked out during a power outage, but
was simply re-booted using an external keyboard.
Fairbairn’s experience highlights the advantages of a local server.
Thompson encountered a few more problems, but still used a FAIMS-
in-the-box effectively. Debugging her setup under field conditions
proved challenging, reinforcing the need for more authentic testing
and comprehensive support for new technologies going into the field:
Setting up the network was also much more of a challenge
when in the field than during a trial run in an office. There
were several technical difficulties with the boot-up of the
server, leading to many instances when data would not sync
or when the server required an external keyboard and monitor
to troubleshoot. The technical support provided by FAIMS
was exceptional, and through a combination of their support
and the fortuitous possession by project personnel of the
needed hardware, all issues were overcome and have now been
addressed by subsequent iterations of FAIMS hardware supply.
This scenario would be much more difficult to negotiate in a
field situation where internet is not readily available, and so in
spite of the improvements that have been made, the necessity
to fully set up and field test the entire system from start to finish
before going to the field cannot be over-emphasized.
Instead of using a dedicated hardware server, VanValkenburgh
attempted to install a virtual server on his laptop. Unfortunately, the
installation failed, and an online server was deployed instead. His
subsequent problems demonstrate the unreliability of the Internet in
fieldwork settings:

--- Page 50 ---
364
We began with futile attempts to set up our own FAIMS server
in the field house, in an Ubuntu virtual machine run off of a
Windows laptop. Because we did not possess the resources to
dedicate an entire machine to serving FAIMS, the development
team provided us with access to their cloud server, and we set up
a wireless access point in our dig house by running a 100-meter
network cable from a nearby internet café and connecting it to
a wireless router. Using this system, our upload speeds consis-
tently averaged 25 Kbps—too slow for syncing, even when
tablets were left to do so overnight. [I] then attempted to sync
tablets on weekend trips to a city located one hour’s drive away
from Zaña. However, the large numbers of photographs we
were attaching to our data records made complete syncs impos-
sible. In the end, the FAIMS development team adjusted the
PAZC module to allow syncing of our textual data alone, and we
manually backed up all photographs onto external hard drives.
The lesson from these experiences echoes other aspects of co-de-
velopment: reliability and performance require an investment from
archaeologists as well as the development team. Local, dedicated
hardware servers are more expensive than online servers, and they
require that users test and maintain them, but they are faster and
more robust than online servers.
Theme 3: Digital Recording and Archaeological
Interpretation—Where Is the Benefit?
When asked to assess the direct impact of the digital recording on
their research, project directors first emphasized improvements in the
quantity, quality, and availability of data. Thompson reported: “Because
FAIMS enabled data to be collected and processed so efficiently, we
were able to collect more data, and this expanded the interpretations
we could make from a field season of the same duration as when we
used paper forms.” Likewise, VanValkenburgh remarked that “the
richness and integrity of our field data have both increased,” an
assessment echoed by Fairbairn “the conversion [to digital recording]
increases quality of information available and makes post-excavation
reconstruction of the site (the aim of the record) much easier . . . [it

--- Page 51 ---
365
also] sped up exchange of information on site between excavators and
specialists.” Although “efficiency” should not be the only, or perhaps
the overriding, goal of digital research (cf. Caraher, Ch. 4.1; Kansa, Ch.
4.2), project directors nonetheless reiterated that enhanced speed,
accuracy, consistency, and granularity represent important contribu-
tions of digital recording to archaeological interpretation.
The process of building data models and accommodating the
precision of digital systems also compels archaeologists to review
their recording practices more generally. Fairbairn observed:
[I]mportantly, the technology has opened up a broader dialogue
about the recording process, increased awareness in the exca-
vation group of the challenges and requirements of recording
and opened a quite fixed system to change.
As part of that review, Fairbairn also noted how digital recording
preserved previously undocumented interim steps of fieldwork:
[W]e have had a very archaic use of “official site photos” which
are of the cleaned up contexts. Well, now everyone can take
images as they go, including as contexts are under excava-
tion (rather than tidy-for-archive shots) and this improves the
chances of understanding the features and contexts we see.
More continuous recordkeeping, including of “messy” work-in-prog-
ress, not only helps researchers at a later time better understand what
they have excavated, but may contribute toward both making work-
flows more transparent and “openly exposing the process of research”
(Kansa, Ch. 4.2), thus improving the reproducibility and profession-
alism of field research.
Digital data collection may not immediately alter researchers’ aims
or interpretive agendas. Fairbairn began his response to questions
about impact by observing that “so far conversion [to digital recording]
has not changed our substantive research goals.” VanValkenburgh
concurred, admitting that “I’m not sure I feel comfortable at this point
asserting that digital field recording methods led us, in linear fashion,
to a series of different conclusions about the past.” It can, neverthe-
less, allow researchers to follow hunches as the project progresses,

--- Page 52 ---
366
and to prove or disprove these intuitions later. VanValkenburgh also
expects digital approaches to help separate real relationships among
his data from accidents of preservation:
The richer, more organized field notes that FAIMS has provided
us will allow me to efficiently move between scales of data
during post-field analysis, comparing trends between sites and
closely examining contexts with distinct patterns to evaluate
whether they are the products of differences in past human
behavior, post-depositional processes, or recording errors.
Similarly, Thompson thought that the standardization of digital data
“clarified the analyses that were needed in order to address ques-
tions about the spatial relationships of artifacts, landforms, and
other objects of interest.” The ability to make this sort of data-driven,
quantitative argument improves the explanatory power and repro-
ducibility of archaeological research, especially when it is combined
with dissemination of the underlying data itself.
Finally, some of the benefits of digital recording may not be realized
immediately. VanValkenburgh noted that the full impact of digital
recording would not be clear until after post-fieldwork analysis and
integration were complete. Looking even further ahead, digitally born
data makes the timely publication of datasets more likely: “the ready
availability . . . of our digital data is going to greatly facilitate making
it publicly accessible in approximately two years.” It is perhaps at the
comparative or synthetic level, beyond individual projects, that we
should seek the greatest interpretive impact. Only after digital data-
sets are published and researchers start reusing and combining them
will the full potential and impact of digital methods be realized.
Conclusions
As field researchers transition to digital archaeology, they face a
number of choices. They must decide the extent to which they want
to go digital, whether to pursue mass-market, generalized, or bespoke
solutions, and how involved they want to be in software develop-
ment—bearing in mind that archaeological recording is complex,
heterogeneous, and idiosyncratic enough to require significant devel-

--- Page 53 ---
367
opment, regardless of the particular approach (cf. Kansa and Bissel
2010). On one hand, giving developers sufficiently specific instruc-
tions, and making implicit knowledge explicit, is time-consuming,
tedious, and prone to failure (Segal 2005). On the other, sticking
with paper minimizes upfront time investments, at the cost of exten-
sive digitization, data cleansing, and error correction later (Roberts
2011: 147, cited in Huggett 2012: 542). “Just doing it yourself” with
commercial software has a certain attraction, but it requires signifi-
cant compromises because no mass-market software package was
built with field archaeology in mind. It also hides, but does not elim-
inate, much of the effort of scoping, development, and testing, an
obfuscation that may lead to significant technical debt and expensive
maintenance later (Kruchten et al. 2012). Bespoke applications, while
capable of producing good outcomes, are expensive to build and diffi-
cult to sustain.
The authors of this paper believe that FAIMS strikes a good
balance between the re-deployability of general-purpose database
software and the domain- and project-specific capability of bespoke
applications. Software co-development in a generalized framework
like FAIMS, involving a genuine partnership between archaeologists
and technologists, is a difficult but productive process that can yield
systems that are effective and fit-to-purpose. Archaeologists know
their particular projects and where they are likely to be improved
by technological intervention, but not always what can be achieved
within a reasonable time and cost. Technologists know the capabili-
ties of their software, and, in cases like the FAIMS project, they have
accumulated experience across many deployments, including both
successes and mistakes. FAIMS 2.0, released in November 2014 is
itself an example of co-development as it benefited enormously from
the three projects discussed in this paper.
In this context, our case studies revealed a number of consistent
themes: (1) moving to digital recording requires an up-front invest-
ment of time and resources balanced by a payoff of clean digital data
later in the project lifecycle, (2) co-development helps archaeologists
and technologists make appropriate decisions to balance features,
reliability, and performance, and (3) higher quantity, quality, and
availability of digitally-born data is a welcome immediate benefit
to the (oft-painful) transition to digital workflow, ahead of potential
long-term benefits, like more rigorous analyses and dissemination of

--- Page 54 ---
368
comprehensive digital datasets, which may eventually revolutionize
interpretations.
The case studies presented here offer lessons applicable to any field
software development project, including customisaton of commer-
cial software or development of bespoke applications. Time invested
up-front during development pays off with time saved digitizing
and cleansing data. Define your requirements and plan carefully, but
expect some miscommunications that will only be resolved through
iterative testing and development. Leave time for iterating. Leave time
for testing. Test early and often. Do not overemphasize features at the
expense of performance, testing, and bug fixing. Test all hardware and
software again under authentic conditions. Ensure field researchers
have excellent in-field support. Developing software that is fit-for-pur-
pose is hard, but the benefits of doing it right are worth it.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the organizers of the National Endowment for
the Humanities funded “Mobilizing the Past” workshop and everyone
involved in the production of this volume, particularly the reviewers
and editors who provided such valuable feedback. The FAIMS project
was funded during 2012–2013 by the National eResearch Collabora-
tion Tools and Resources (NeCTAR) eResearch Tools program (RT043),
and from 2014 to 2016 by the Australian Research Council (ARC)
Linkage Equipment, Infrastructure, and Facilities (LIEF) program
(LE140100151). The University of New South Wales (2012–2014) and
Macquarie University (2015–present) have offered the project a home
and made significant cash and in-kind contributions to the LIEF
(which is a matching grant). Other organizations providing cash and
in-kind contributions to the LIEF-funded phase of the project include:
the University of Queensland, the University of Sydney, La Trobe
University, Flinders University, Southern Cross University, the Univer-
sity of California, Berkeley (Open Context), the University of Chicago
(OCHRE), Digital Antiquity (tDAR), and the University of York (the
Archaeology Data Service). For more project information, see http://
www.faims.edu.au/.

--- Page 55 ---
369
https://mobilizingthepast.mukurtu.net/collec-
tion/32-measure-twice-cut-once-cooperative-deploy-
ment-generalized-archaeology-specific-field
http://dc.uwm.edu/arthist_mobilizingthepast/15
References
Baird, D., A. Fairbairn, L. Martin, and C. Middleton. 2012. “The
Boncuklu Project: The Origins of Sedentism, Cultivation and
Herding in Central Anatolia,” in M. Özdogan, N. Basgelen, and P.
Kuniholm, eds., The Neolithic in Turkey: New Excavations and New
Research. Istanbul: Archaeology & Art Publications, 219–244.
FileMaker Inc. 2015. “FileMaker Go for iPad & iPhone.” https://www.
filemaker.com/au/products/filemaker-go/
Fisher, C., M. Terras, and C. Warwick. 2010. “Integrating New Tech-
nologies into Established Systems: A Case Study from Roman
Silchester,” in B. Frischer, J. W. Crawford, D. Koller, eds., Making
History Interactive: Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods
in Archaeology (CAA). Proceedings of the 37th International Confer-
ence, Williamsburg, Virginia, United States of America, March 22–26,
2009, http://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/1324501/1/1324501.pdf
Huggett, J. 2012. “Lost in Information? Ways of Knowing and Modes
of Representation in e-Archaeology,” World Archaeology 44:
538–552.
Kansa, E. C., and A. Bissell. 2010. “Web Syndication Approaches for
Sharing Primary Data in ‘Small Science’ Domains,” Data Science
Journal 9: 42–53.
Kitchenham, B., S. L. Pfleeger, B. Mccoll, and S. Eagan. 2002. “An
Empirical Study of Maintenance and Development Estimation
Accuracy,” Journal of Systems and Software 64.1: 57–77.
Kruchten, P., R. L. Nord, and I. Ozkaya. 2012. “Technical Debt: From
Metaphor to Theory and Practice.” IEEE software 29 (6): 18-21,
doi:10.1109/MS.2012.167.
Limp, W. F. 2011. “Web 2.0 and beyond, or on the Web, Nobody
Knows You’re an Archaeologist,” in E. C. Kansa, S. W. Kansa, E.
Watrall, eds., Archaeology 2.0: New Tools for Communication and

--- Page 56 ---
370
Collaboration. Los Angeles: Cotsen Institute of Archaeology Press,
265–280.
Marean, C. W. 2010. “Introduction to the Special Issue: The Middle
Stone Age at Pinnacle Point Site 13B, a Coastal Cave near Mossel
Bay (Western Cape Province, South Africa),” Journal of Human
Evolution 59: 231–233.
Might, M. 2015. “The CRAPL: An Academic-Strength Open Source
License.” http://matt.might.net/articles/crapl/
Popp, K. M., ed. 2015. Best Practices for Commercial Use of Open Source
Software. Norderstedt: Norderstedt Books on Demand.
Raymond, E. S. 2001. The Cathedral and the Bazaar: Musings on Linux
and Open Source by an Accidental Revolutionary. Rev. ed. Beijing:
O’Reilly.
Roberts, J. 2011. An Anthropological Study of War Crimes against
Children in Kosovo and Bosnia-Herzegovina in the 1990s. Ph.D.
dissertation, Glasgow University, http://theses.gla.ac.uk/2562/
Ross, S., B. Ballsun-Stanton, A. Sobotkova, and P. Crook. 2015.
“Building the Bazaar: Enhancing Archaeological Field Recording
through an Open-Source Approach,” in A. T. Wilson and B. Ed-
wards, eds., Open Source Archaeology: Ethics and Practice. Warsaw:
De Gruyter Open, 111–129.
Ross, S., A. Sobotkova, B. Ballsun-Stanton, and P. Crook. 2013.
“Creating eResearch Tools for Archaeologists: The Federated
Archaeological Information Management Systems Project,”
Australian Archaeology 77: 107–119.
Runyon, J. 2012. “An Unexpected Ass Kicking.” Impossible, http://im-
possiblehq.com/an-unexpected-ass-kicking/
Segal, J. 2005. “When Software Engineers Met Research Scientists: A
Case Study,” Empirical Software Engineering 10: 517–536.
Sobotkova, A., B. Ballsun-Stanton, S. Ross, and P. Crook. 2015.
“Arbitrary Offline Data Capture on All of Your Androids: The
FAIMS Mobile Platform,” in A. Traviglia, ed., Across Space and
Time: Papers from the 41st Conference on Computer Applications
and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology, Perth, 25–28 March 2013.
Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 80–88.
Sun, Q. 2012. “The Scientific Software Developer in Academia.”
Software Sustainability Institute, http://www.software.ac.uk/
blog/2012–05–01-scientific-software-developer-academia

--- Page 57 ---
371
Thompson, J. C., A. Mackay, D. K. Wright, M. Welling, A. Greaves, E.
Gomani-Chindebvu, and D. Simengwa. 2015. “Renewed Investiga-
tions into the Middle Stone Age of Northern Malawi,” Quaternary
International 270: 129–39.
VanValkenburgh, P. 2012. Building Subjects: Landscapes of Forced Re-
settlement in the Zaña and Chamán Valleys, Peru, 16th–17th Centuries
c.e. Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University.

--- Page 58 ---

